<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Linting</h1>
</div>

---

# We have already used a linting tool

*Can you think of it?*

---

# Answer: ShellCheck

*What did it do?*

---

# Why lint?

Definition: Linters are a ["static code analysis tool used to flag programming errors, bugs, stylistic errors and suspicious constructs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lint_(software)).

Give some reasons for why you should lint your code.

*Discuss in pairs*

---

# What can you lint for?


**Automated Code Analysis**: Linters perform static analysis on the code without executing it.

**Error Detection**: Identifies programming errors, such as syntax errors or type mismatches.

**Code Quality and Consistency**: Checks for adherence to coding standards and conventions, ensuring consistency across the codebase.

**Improving Readability**: Helps in formatting code in a readable and maintainable way.

**Finding Potential Bugs**: Detects code patterns that are likely to be errors or could lead to bugs in the future.

**Security**: Identifies security vulnerabilities and insecure coding practices.

**Performance**: Identifies code that could be optimized for better performance. [Interesting example: Million](https://million.dev/)

---

# Popular linters

| Programming Language | Popular Linters                 |
|----------------------|---------------------------------|
| JavaScript           | ESLint, JSHint, JSLint, Standard|
| Python               | Pylint, flake8, Pyflakes, Black |
| Java                 | Checkstyle, PMD, FindBugs       |
| C/C++                | Clang-Tidy, CPPLint, GCC        |
| Ruby                 | RuboCop, Reek                   |
| PHP                  | PHP_CodeSniffer, PHPMD          |
| CSS                  | Stylelint, CSSLint              |
| TypeScript           | TSLint, ESLint                  |
| Go                   | Golint, Gofmt, Go Vet           |
| Swift                | SwiftLint                       |
| Kotlin               | Ktlint, Detekt                  |
| Rust                 | Clippy                          |




---

# When and where to lint?

Locally before pushing to version control.

CI/CD pipelines. 

---


<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Git hooks - Hands-on</h1>
</div>



---

# Let's lint a Node.js project using standard

1. Let's make a Node.js project with intentional code style mistakes. 

2. Run locally: `npx standard --fix` 

We don't want to run --fix in the CI pipeline since it modifies code and the code in the CI pipeline does not update the code in version control.

---

# Git Hooks

The goal in DevOps is always to catch problems as early as possible. 

We can disallow developers from pushing if their code isn't up to standard. 

Downside: Git Hooks must be manually configured on every machine. There is no way to push them into version control. 

---

# Git Hooks - Our first hook

Let's first try to create a `hello world` git hook.

First initialize a git repository. 

In the `.git/hooks` folder, create a file called `pre-commit`. You can copy the sample for inspiration (assuming you are in the hooks folder):

```bash
$ mv pre-commit.sample pre-commit
```

Add an echo statement to the file:

```bash
$ echo "Hello, world!" > pre-commit
```

Now try to commit and see the result. 
 
---

# Linting with `Standard`

Create a Javscript file with some intentional errors.

You can run [Standard](https://www.npmjs.com/package/standard#is-there-a-git-pre-commit-hook) in the project to lint the code

```bash
$ npx standard
```

Or to fix it:

```bash
$ npx standard --fix
```

---

# Git Hooks - Adding `Standard` to a hook

In the `pre-commit` file replace the content with the following. 

https://www.npmjs.com/package/standard#is-there-a-git-pre-commit-hook

It requires you to have Standard installed. The above script will work if you install it globally:

```bash
$ npm instal -g standard
```

Or you could modify the script to use the `npx` command:

```bash
xargs_r -E '' -t npx standard
```


You could also install it locally in the project with (`npm install standard`) and modify the script like this:

```bash
xargs_r -E '' -t ./node_modules/.bin/standard
```


---

# pre-commit library

Tip: There is a library called `pre-commit` that can be used to manage and easily install git hooks.

https://pre-commit.com/


---

# Git hooks pros and cons?

*Let's discuss*

---

# Git hooks pros and cons

**Pros**

  - Early Error Detection / Immediate Feedback

  - Prevents Bade Commits

**Cons**

  - Local Only

  - Manual Configuration

  - Bypassable (with the `--no-verify` flag)

  - Cross-Platform Issues (bash scripts could cause problems on Windows)


---

<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Linting in Github Actions</h1>
</div>

---

# CI - Linting example in lint.yaml

This is to give you an idea of how to set up a linter in a CI pipeline.

Look into other linters for Node.js such as ESLint and JSHint.

The previous slides use Standard because it requires no configuration. 

```yaml
lint:
    name: 'Run linter'
    defaults:
        run:
        shell: bash
        # Defines the working directory for all run steps in the workflow
        working-directory: ./web
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:    
    - uses: actions/checkout@v2
        name: 'Checkout repository'
    
    - name: 'Install Dependencies'
        run: npm install

    - name: 'Run Linter'
        run: npx standard -v
```


---

# Superlinter


https://github.com/marketplace/actions/super-linter

---

# hadolint

Once we start working with Docker, we can use `hadolint` to lint our Dockerfiles.


