<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Imperative vs. Declarative</h1>
</div>

---

# Imperative vs. Declarative

## Imperative

Focus on *how* to achieve the desired outcome.

Explicitly defines the steps in a sequence of operations.

State changes are directly managed in the code.


## Declarative

Focus on *what* the desired outcome is.

The tool or system determines the steps to achieve the result.

Defined in configuration, expressions, or rules.

<br>

*Can you think of examples of each?*

---

# Examples of Imperative vs. Declarative

## Imperative

* General-purpose programming languages.

* Scripting languages: Bash etc.

* Most low-level languages (such as Assembly).

## Declarative

* HTML.

* CSS.

* Most Query Langauges. Example: SQL (has some imperative elements, though).

* YAML (Github Action is built on a declarative paradigm).

---

# Imperative IaC example with [Pulumi](https://www.pulumi.com/)

Supports many languages like Python, JavaScript, TypeScript, Go and C#. And YAML.

Simple example in Python:

```python
import pulumi
from pulumi_aws import s3

# Create an AWS S3 bucket
bucket = s3.Bucket('my-bucket')

# Export the bucket name
pulumi.export('bucket_name', bucket.id)
```

---

# Problematic Imperative Example

Bash example

```bash
#!/bin/bash
mkdir logs
INSTANCE_ID=$(aws ec2 run-instances --image-id ami-0c55b1bfafe1f0c59 --instance-type t2.micro --query 'Instances[0].InstanceId' --output text)
echo "Instance ID: $INSTANCE_ID" > ./logs/logs.txt
```

*Can you identify the problems above?*

<details> 
  <summary>Hint</summary>
   It will fail at the first script line.
</details>

---

# Problems with the script

If one thing fails then everything fails.

1. We didn't think to check if the folder already exists. . You can't `mkdir` a folder that already exists.

2. No error handling. This includes: 
    * Misconfigured AWS CLI.
    * Failure to create the instance.
    * Insufficient permissions to write to the logs.txt file.

In the imperative approach we have to concern ourselves with all the edge cases that might happen.

---

# It's a symptom of the script being non-idempotent

> *Idempotence is the property of certain operations […] whereby they can be applied multiple times 
without changing the result beyond the initial application.*

Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence

Our goal is to achieve idempotency.

---

# Declarative example

We just write what we want. 

Terraform (HCL) example:

```hcl
resource "aws_instance" "example" {
    ami           = "ami-0c55b1bfafe1f0c59"
    instance_type = "t2.micro"
}
```

Continues where it left off even despite potential failures in the middle of the process.

If the block is added on top of already provisioned infrastructure then it will create a new instance.

If the block is removed then it will destroy the instance.

---

# HCL (HashiCorp Configuration Language)

Terraform can be defined as either HCL or JSON. But HCL is commonly used because it is:

* Descriptive: Aims to be a readable JSON-like alternative to JSON

Generally about HCL, it is:

* A **domain-specific langauge** designed for IaC.
* **Declarative**: Focused on the desired end state
* **Non-Imperative**: Specifies *what* is needed, not *how* to accomplish it.
* **Idempotent**: Applying the same configuration multiple times results in the same state, without unintended side effects.

Interestingly enough, Github Actions were originally defined in HCL but uses YAML now.

---

# Declarative vs. Imperative - Pros and cons

| Aspect       | Declarative                                     | Imperative                                     |
|--------------|-------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| **Focus**    | What the end state should be.                   | How to achieve the end state.                  |
| **Idempotency** | Naturally idempotent, can be applied multiple times with the same outcome. | Requires careful scripting to achieve idempotency. |
| **Ease of Use** | Higher level of abstraction, easier for defining complex infrastructure. | Requires detailed step-by-step scripting, potentially more complex for large infrastructures. |

