
<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Terraform - Limitations</h1>
</div>


---


# Limitation for us, students

Azure for Students at KEA doesn't support the creation or management of a **Service Principal**.

[Learn more](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/azurerm/latest/docs/guides/service_principal_client_secret)

Creating a Service Principal would allow us to programatically authenticate ourselves instead of using `az login` which opens a browser.

If only... Then we would be able to run Terraform in CI. For instance, a GitHub Action that uses Terraform to automatically provision a new test environment for every build on a speocific branch. That would be **close to pro**!

---


# Limitations - What Terraform is not

When you have a fresh VM what is it that you always do? Upgrade, install, setup etc.

Terraform is mainly for provisionining cloud services and not for changing the internal state of VMs for instance.

It can be achieved with Terraform with `remote-exec` or `local-exec` but it is severely limited.

Anisble is much more suited for this task.

*Can you think of use cases where one might prefer to use Configuration Management Tools?*

---

# Limitation: Why is Terraform so slow?

It is true that Terraform can hog your computer's resources.

But know that the heavy lifting happens on the cloud provider's side. 

It might feel sluggish but it is because it takes time for Azure to provision or tear down new resources.

Consider the alternative of having to manually provision services a hundred times! Or how before cloud it took days if not months to get new hardware approved, purchased and then setup.

---

<div class="title-card">
    <h1>Terraform - Problems</h1>
</div>

---

# The state file

A reminder about the Terraform state file:

- Stored locally.

- Always in JSON. 

- Named `terraform.tfstate`

Is used to:

* keep track of references to existing resources

* maintain the dependency graph between services

It is stored locally by default, though everyone in a team should have the latest version.

---

# Why using a VCS for the state is no good

Terraform is excellent for versioning your infrastructure.

But you should not push the state file into git because it risks:

* mergeing two versions of the file incorrectly, resulting in an invalid file.

* exposing secrets about your system which can compromise security.

---

# State Drift

It can lead to a failure to provision the infrastructure if the state file is not up to date with the infrastructure when running `terraform apply`.

Rarely a state change can be ammened with `terraform refresh`. If it can't then there isn't a fix for it. You have to start completely over.

A **MAJOR** downside with Terraform is how there ufortunately is no standardized way to deal with state file. 

**Note**: This problem can be solved among you with coordination in your groups but let's look at how they deal with them in large companies. 

---

# The State File - Finding a viable solution

A viable place to store the state file must adhere to the following principles:

## Provide a write mechanism

Consider a CI/CD pipeline where runners are destroyed after use. If the pipeline updates the infrastructure then it should be able to save the state changes. The same is true locally. 

## Locking

Ensure single concurrent access. Two developers cannot use the same Terraform setup at the same time.

## Version Consistency

Ensure that users apply changes against the latest state version.



---

# Common Solution - Using cloud storage without lock support - I

Storing it only solves half of the problem. 

Some scripting could ensure that the state file is locked when a developer is working on it.


---

# Common Solution - Using Cloud Storage with Lock Support

- [HashiCorp vault](https://www.hashicorp.com/products/vault)

- [Google Cloud Storage](https://cloud.google.com/docs/terraform/resource-management/store-state)

- [Azure Storage Account](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/developer/terraform/store-state-in-azure-storage?tabs=azure-cli#4-understand-state-locking)

- [Azure Key Vault](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/key-vault/)

- AWS S3 combined with DynamoDB (for lock handling)

Remember that the problem is that there is no standardized, agreed-upon way to solve this issue. 

---

# How other IaC tools deal with state

What sets the competing IaC tools apart is how they deal with state. 

One example is Bicep which stores its state files entirely in cloud by default. 

Downside: Then you are locked into using Azure as your cloud provider. 
 

| IaC Tool    | State Management                                  | Default Storage               | Self-manage Options              |
|-------------|---------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| Terraform   | Causes the problems we have seen                  | Local filesystem              | AWS S3, Azure Blob, GCS, etc.    |
| Pulumi      | Cloud-based with history, auditing, rollbacks     | Pulumi Service (Cloud)        | Local, AWS S3, Azure Blob, GCS   |
| Chef        | Stores state as attributes on Chef server         | Chef Server                   | Local mode, Chef Automate        |
| Puppet      | Compiles catalogs representing desired state      | Puppet Master/Server          | Local filesystem, PuppetDB       |


But Terraform is [still the most used IaC tool](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2023/#section-most-popular-technologies-other-tools) and an industry standard. 

---

# Problem: How do we ensure that developers do not go crazy with the infrastructure that they provision

There are various ways to enforce policies. In the IaC world, it is called **guard rails**.

Example: Spacelift is a platform for this:

https://spacelift.io/

---

# Repated warning: Terraform is a time sink

---

# Discussion

*Running Terraform isn't easy so why is it still worth it?*


---

# Let's look at the exam report requirements and exam requirements

They can be found as links at the top of the semester plan.

<!-- todo include links -->